I'm Wesley Morris and this is Cannonball
Today. Hated it.
[Music]
Last month, Taylor Swift released her
12th album.
[Music]
>> Life of a Showgirl. And for me, the most
interesting thing about it didn't really
have so much to do with the music
itself. It was how critics treated it.
The aggregation of reviews were mostly
enthusiastic, but you know, they also
included assessments that I'd describe
as unimpressed, a little exasperated,
kind of weary.
I'm somewhere between those two camps.
Enthusiastically exasperated. Is that a
thing? That's me. But that's not my
point. My point is that critics rolling
their eyes at Taylor Swift is a
noteworthy shift, not just from reviews
of Taylor Swift's music, but lately from
pop music criticism in general. For the
last decade or so, popular cultural
criticism and music especially, has
seemed scared of its own shadow. or
maybe more to the point, scared of the
fan armies, ready to attack anybody who
dares to question their preferred stars
and what they might be up to with
whatever they've just put out. And so,
as the reviews came in, I thought, and I
don't want to get too carried away here,
but this actually might represent a kind
of return to form to the mean old days
of music criticism where you could just
say what you felt.
>> Think this show constitutes cruelty to
animals? Not unless they're watching it.
>> All of that made me want to talk to my
fellow homie in criticism, Kellifane.
Not too long ago, Kellifa wrote about
the softening of criticism, this very
subject for the New Yorker. He doesn't
argue that this softening is a crisis,
which I appreciate. Although, isn't it
kind of a crisis? He just argues that
it's happened. And I I really wanted to
talk to him about what is happening.
Califa, welcome to Cannonball.
[Music]
>> Well, thanks for having me at
Cannonball. I'm excited to be at
Cannonball. I'm ready to be ripped to
shreds in a way that's going to disprove
the entire thesis of the thing I wrote.
Yes, we're I'm I got my claw. I'm ready
to go.
>> It's going to go down.
>> All right. Before we get into that, I
actually would like to just uh set the
set the room temperature for what it is
we're talking about here. And I want to
show you something.
>> Show me something.
>> All right. So, we're going to look over
here. Let's see something.
>> Let's switch channels. This show is
dull.
>> You bet.
>> What is that?
>> It looks like two ancient old guys
sitting in a theater box watching
television.
>> That's crazy. No one would watch junk
like that.
>> So, Kellifa, who who are we looking at
here? We're looking at Statatler and
Waldorf, the critics from the Muppet
Show. So, the Muppets are on stage at
this theater, and usually we're just
watching the stage as if we're in the
audience, but then sometimes the camera
kind of pans up to this opera box where
there are these two old guys, Statatler
and Waldorf, watching the action,
commenting on the action, and that's
when we realize that like we're
reminded, oh, there is a show within a
show.
>> What was that?
>> It's called the medium sketch.
>> The medium sketch?
>> Yeah, it wasn't rare and it certainly
wasn't well done.
I love Statler and Waldorf
>> and I didn't understand that it was
criticism, but I definitely understood
that it was
telling me that what was happening down
on stage or like, you know, as a viewer
on TV, the thing we had just watched had
some value one way or the other. Often
they were like really [__] about it.
And that was the joke. And but that was
beneath the joke was an understanding
that like that's what it is to be a
critic, right? to criticize means to say
that something is bad. And so that was
that was their whole role. And I think
as a kid, I probably just intuited that.
I just figured like, oh, that's what a
critic is. A critic is someone who's
like kind of cranky
>> and has something negative to say,
right? The idea is that the people in
general are kind of happy to hear
whatever is going on on stage and the
critics are there to put the fist down
and be like, "No, this sucks." Right?
And I know for me as a kid, there was
something I liked about people having
strong opinions about things, people
disagreeing.
>> The harshness of their reviews was part
of what was appealing about
>> Yeah. The fact that you could see
something on TV and you didn't have to
automatically like it. Like you could
hate it if you wanted. Like that was
interesting to me. And I think probably
before I even knew that's what I was
thinking about, maybe I got some of the
same pleasure from like Cisll and Eert.
But as well as Boogie Knight's plays, at
the end of the movie, in a sequence that
sums up the fate of all the characters,
I was left cold. Frankly, their fate
seemed arbitrary, and I certainly found
no larger meaning in this film. That's
why you're getting a positive, to be
sure, but mixed review for me.
>> Mixed. This is on my list of the 10 best
films of the year. This is a wonderful
film. And that last sequence,
>> these two guys are going to be
disagreeing about movies and disagreeing
with each other. and you're going to see
that disagreement and that's maybe going
to spur you to decide which one of them
if either of them you agree with, right?
Like who's going to win this argument?
Sis and Eert are basically the Statatler
and Waldorf of the Real World. And
there's also another fictionalized duo.
And that of course is the Men on Film
Gentlemen from In Living Color.
>> Yes.
>> Hello. I'm Blen Edwards and I'm Antoine
Merryweather
>> and welcome to Men on Film. And it's
Damon Weighins and David Allen Greer.
Basically is two very gay, flamboyantly
gay men reviewing movies. And they're
reviewing real movies,
>> right?
>> They're sitting in director's chairs.
They've got on these outfits that are I
mean, I don't know what to call these.
They're
>> the teeny tiny hats were what I always
remember.
>> Five stars. And not only that, but like
it's the other accessories. It's like
the ascots. Um, the earrings.
>> First off, my favorite love story of all
times is all the president's men.
Now, this is a story about outing in
which two male reporters has to
investigate the goings on in the White
House.
>> And they were also making fun of the
idea of the critic as a serious figure.
Right. There is this idea
>> anti Statatler and Waldorf.
>> Yes. the idea that there is this
starchiness, this old-fashionedness, and
they were going to do it in a very
unstarchy way.
>> Two snaps and a rewind.
>> This is this is this brings us to your
piece, which is called Everything Nice,
but is really about this a history of
music criticism that involves this
change from like
>> the mean old days,
>> from nasty to sweet.
>> That's right. And maybe back again. and
maybe hopefully if we're lucky. So, I
don't know. Let's talk about it. Let's
let let's get into the piece.
>> So, this probably goes back a few
decades before that, right? If you look
at the the dawn of rock criticism in the
late 1960s, um it is a quite cranky
profession. And you have people like
Robert Krisca, the so-called dean of
American rock critics, who's giving out
grades to albums. And you have this idea
that, yeah, they're going to mix it up a
little bit. they're going to fight a
little bit and it's going to be it's
going to be a kind of a cranky
discipline. And so as the music evolves
that evolves a little bit and by the
time you get to the early 2000s um in
the US a lot of music critics are
talking about this thing called rockism.
>> And rockism is a term to describe
basically a musical prejudice, right? An
idea that good pop music kind of looks
like rock music and functions like rock
music, right? It's probably going to be
earnest. It's going to be they're going
to be able to really play and sing live
and it's not going to be too pop, right?
So, it's going to be looking down on
anything that seems a little bit too
concerned with fashion, right? Too
concerned with music videos, right? It's
a it's a it's an idea of what musical
authenticity should look like and sound
like.
>> It's a purity paradigm essentially. And
through which through that paradigm
passes like every kind of popular music
and it is sort of measured against
you know these sort of rock ideologies
essentially
>> and and that can be broader than that
right is this real country music or is
that fact the fake stuff on the radio
right is this real hiphop or this is
that gangster down south whatever right
like there's a lot of these binaries and
I want to say just for the record like
Chris Gow the so-called dean of American
rock criticism has always been an
extremely wide listener. He's someone
who's written probably more about
African pop music than any critic of his
era.
>> Right.
>> I think there were people that were less
imaginative listeners who were
influenced by him that did a much less
interesting version of what they took to
be his school. And so in 2004, I wrote
about this here at the New York Times, a
piece about rockism and about this
discussion that was happening. And I
made the case that there were a kind of
a generation of critics who maybe were
still thinking about music in those
terms and that that made it hard for
them to appreciate what I considered to
be some of the most exciting music that
was happening. Whether that was kind of
Nashville country music, whether that
was mainstream hiphop, whether that was
smooth R&B, that the the vocabulary that
critics used was a little bit out of
touch with what was going down. Oh, I
see you. You printed it out.
>> I I came prepared, sir.
>> You got receipts.
>> So, I just I will like read you to you
>> about this rockism piece because I
think, you know, I had never heard this
term before, your piece. I remember
reading it and having my mind expanded
in this really exciting way because it
answered a question or a feeling that I
had had about the way like all kinds of
criticism in a in an interesting way
were being practiced and like who was
not
being lavished with the same degree of
rigor, attention, enthusiasm,
care, concern
>> as opposed to just sheer dismissal.
Right. I think for me in a sense I got
interested in music through criticism,
not from reading critics, but I got
really interested in music through punk
rock.
>> And punk rock, part of what it was was a
criticism, right? Part of what punk rock
is is is a movement that says like, "No,
this thing that's happening sucks. This
thing that's happening is bad." Like
aesthetically bad, morally bad, all that
stuff that you normal people listen to,
there's something wrong with it. And
we're going to be a critique of that.
But I think honestly I'm not sure I
would have started to get as serious
about writing about music as I did if I
hadn't gotten back into hip-hop,
>> which is what I loved before I loved
punk. And then I kind of like left it
for a while and then I came back to it
really in the '9s. And
>> unlike punk rock, punk rock, there were
these totally obscure bands and I was
like, well, the rest of the world hates
these bands. That's fine. They're
supposed to hate it. It's okay. Whereas
with hip-hop, I felt like no.
You got your black.
>> There's something happening. These
records are really incredible.
>> They're not getting celebrated and
written about the way they should. The
world doesn't understand 400° by
Juvenile and they should.
>> Right. Right.
>> Just to name one that to a record that
totally expanded my mind and a record
that a lot of even hip-hop critics at
the time didn't really enjoy.
>> Yeah. Because it was juvenile, right?
>> And it was it was but it was a big hit.
It was cool. It was regional. It was
American. I was like, "This is
incredible." So, I think
moving a little bit away from thinking
as a punk rocker and getting back into
hip-hop and some other stuffed inspire
kinds of public arguments because there
was an argument worth having. I thought
people were wrong about hip-hop,
>> right? And so, I will just lure you to
the lure us all to the end of this
piece. What is it? It was originally
called the the rap against rockism,
right? Um, this is you. Good critics are
good listeners. And the problem with
rockism is that it gets in the way of
listening. If you're waiting for some
song that conjures up soul or honesty or
grit or rebellion, you might miss out on
Carara's Ecstatic Electroop or Alan
Jackson Sly Country Ballads or Lord
Lloyd Banks Felonius Purr. Wow, it takes
me back. Rockism makes it hard to hear
the glorious incoherent corporate
finance audience audience- tested mess
that passes for popular music these
days. To glorify only performers who
write their own songs and play their own
guitars is to ignore the marketplace
that helps create the music we hear in
the first place with its checkbook
chasing super producers, its audience
obsessed executives and its cred hungry
performers. And that is essentially
rockism.
>> Yeah. What I think was interesting about
that moment was it introduced this
tension, right, where there were classes
of of critics who were younger than your
Chris Gowals who came up for your Robert
Kriscow and you know your old school
Rolling Stone critics who were like
sincerely, passionately, furiously
interested in hip-hop, interested in
like you know metal um pop music as as
practiced on the charts of Billboard.
>> I think it might be interesting to like
just sort of live in it for a second.
>> For personal reasons, I always think
about the summer of 2001 because it was
my first appearance in The New Yorker. I
was super super excited.
>> What is your appearance in that?
>> I I profiled a rapper named Jay-Z.
>> Oh, I know him. I know. Known to me. And
but
>> wait, is this it?
>> This is it. This is the New Yorker music
issue from 2001.
>> Oh, I love this.
>> It's got a little hip-hop portfolio.
It's got
>> Oh, no. It's got the notorious PJ Harvey
piece that Hill annals wrote where he's
like, "Sorry, Lauren Hill. The real [__]
is this is this white British lady."
>> It's an incredible It's got Alex Ross on
Radio Head getting all Musicalological
on Radio Head. An incredible issue. And
it has this piece by Nick Hornby who was
then kind of acting as the magazine's
pop music critic. Um Nick Hornby
obviously famous novelist screenwriter
and so yes one of the most you know one
of the most acclaimed writers of his
generation but also a huge music fan.
And so he had been writing a series of
music criticism pieces for the New
Yorker magazine. And for this issue he
decided to do something kind of crazy at
least crazy for him. He listened to the
top 10, like the 10 most popular albums
in America as determined by the
Billboard 200 chart.
>> Yep.
>> And he was just gonna say what he
actually thought of them.
>> Having just reread this thing,
>> did you read it when it came out in
>> Oh, of course I did. In 2001, I have a
very clear memory of
like being surprised that Nick Hornby
also enjoyed Alicia Keys's album,
>> her first album.
>> That was the only one. Uh, yes. That was
the only
>> 10 album. That was the only one he could
have imagined listening to. Um, all
right. So, here's your top 10 that Nick
Hornby is going to town on in this piece
of criticism. Uh, songs in a minor by
Alicia Keys.
[Music]
>> The saga continues by P. Diddy and the
Bad Boy family. Take this money. Take
this money. Ain't no way you can take
this money.
>> Devil's night by D12.
[Music]
>> Break the cycle by Stained. Yes.
>> Survivor by Destiny Sh. That's number
five. I'm a survivor. I'm not going to
give up.
>> Jagged Little Thrill by Jagged Edge. Oh
my god.
[Music]
>> Take Off Your Pants and Jacket by
Blink182.
[Music]
>> Lil Romeo by Lil Romeo.
Skin by Melissa Ethridge
>> and Hybrid Theory by Lincoln Park.
>> It doesn't even matter how hard you try.
>> There you go. and he, you know, he
basically is
sitting with this music and deciding
that it's just a lot of it is
unlistenable
>> and that it's not for him.
>> It's not Well, it's Well, it's true
because he's looking at this music
through the paradigm of 20 years before
>> and what these albums would have been on
the same chart 20 years before
essentially. Why' you identify that as
being like a very good for example of
the way things previously operated?
>> Well, because when that piece was
published in 2001, there was all sorts
of push back whereas especially like
younger critics were saying like this is
terrible. This proves that the New
Yorker is not serious about popular
music. I can't believe like they they
thought like, oh, this is the old guard.
This is the establishment.
>> And it's interesting because when I look
back at this piece now, that's not what
I'm struck by. What I'm struck by is the
honesty.
>> Yeah.
>> And the wit and the fact that like these
days if a critic hated just about
everything in the top 10, they would
never tell you because that would make
them seem maybe out of touch or
something. And and I wish there was more
of that spirit today where people were
being honest and saying like, I actually
don't like any of this stuff as opposed
to sometimes I read people now
>> and you're kind of reading between the
lines of what it is they're saying.
>> Yeah. And they're like, oh yeah, I love
Charlie XCX. And I'm like, do you like
really just like everyone loves Charlie?
There's no one who's like, "No, this is
not for me. This is terrible." And
again, I think this is maybe not to get
us into a rabbit hole, but that idea of
an album being not for me,
>> I think that's just a polite way of
saying it's bad.
>> Yes.
>> I don't think there's anything
>> I would never use a phrase like that.
>> Yeah. I don't think and and so but he's
he's explicitly doing both because this
was the last in a series of columns that
Nick Hornby wrote as essentially a music
critic for the New Yorker and this was
the last one in that series. Obviously
he's a world famous novelist and
screenwriter. He has lots of other
things to do but the column is kind of a
resignation letter.
>> He's kind of saying like if this is pop
music
>> I can't do it.
>> I'm not a pop critic. Yeah. And so, yes,
when I read that now, it makes me think
of some of the moves that he was making
then that people that many critics no
longer feel like they can make,
>> right? No longer feel like they can be
like this, like this record is dumb. I
don't want to listen to dumb stuff like
this, right? That's a very human
reaction. And so, it's interesting this
piece that at the time there was some
blowback to it. I read it now and I read
it really fondly. Yeah. Not just because
Hornby is a great writer, but because
>> there's something refreshing about his
just I don't like this and here's here's
why it's bad.
>> And which is also about disagreeing with
the conventional wisdom or with the
public, right? Like even the the hornby
piece, he's not coming across as like
I'm a cranky guy who hates all music.
He's saying I love music more than
anything.
>> I just don't love like what's popular. I
love this other stuff. But I kind of
want to sit with
like another aspect of this kind of of
what we're going to call a a era of
harshness. But it happens 20 years
before the era we're talking about. And
I'm just going to read something from
one of my favorite critics ever to walk
the earth, Greg Tate.
>> Greg Tate.
>> And Greg, of course, wrote for The
Village Voice for several years. And
this is um
>> kind of helped invent hip-hop criticism.
And and not only that, but you also had
a guard of critics who were black
critics
>> who wanted nothing to do with hip-hop,
right?
>> Yeah.
>> And were cursing it, saying all kinds of
I mean, you want to talk about rockism,
let's talk about like
>> intra black racism
>> like like many great kinds of music,
hip-hop was creating and emphasizing a
generation gap,
>> right? And into the gap steps, Greg
Tate.
>> RIP. If you know Greg Tate, you probably
know this piece. And it's called The
Dead, the Devil Made Them Do It, Public
Enemy. But he's writing about It Takes a
Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back by
Public Enemy. Comes out 1988. He mostly
loves the album, but in the middle of,
you know, this very, very granular
assessment of what the samples are
doing, what Chuck D is doing, the values
of, you know, black nationalism of this
music. Greg takes a second to say the
following.
To know public enemy is to love the agit
prop and artful noise. And to work I
mean I can't believe I'm reading it like
this. This is not how Greg Tate sounds.
Let me be true. Better job. To know
public enemy is to love the agit prop
and artful noise and to worry over the
whack [__] philosophy they espouse.
like quote the black woman has always
been kept up by the white male because
the white male has always wanted the
black woman.
Like
gays aren't doing what's needed to build
the black nation. Period.
Like quote. White people are actually
monkeys uncles because that's who they
made it with in the Caucasian hills.
Period.
like quote, "If the Palestinians took up
arms, went into Israel, and killed all
the Jews, it'd be all right." Period.
From this idiot BL public enemy, this is
still Greg, are obviously making it up
as they go along. Since public enemies
show sound reasoning when they focus on
racism as a total of the US power
structure, they should be intelligent
enough to realize that dehumanizing
gays, women, and Jews isn't going to set
black people free. As their prophet, Mr.
Farrakhan hasn't overcome one or another
of these moral lapses. Public Enemy
might not either. For now, swallowing
the Public Enemy pill means taking the
bitter with the sweet. And if they don't
grow up,
>> later for they asses.
>> I mean, well, one of the things you hear
in that is confidence, right? The
confidence to be like,
>> "No, this is bad. This is wrong." And I
think um
>> within the context, the larger or the
slightly larger context of this album
being a landmark according to him.
>> And this became a major thread and a
major kind of tension within hip-hop
criticism, which was you had a lot of
critics who found themselves not
agreeing with a lot of the things that
rappers were saying. And so sometimes
that meant like dismissing all that
stuff, right? Like if the rule is that
we can't really cosign any album that
has language that we find offensive, a
lot of critics were like, "Oh, maybe
hip-hop is bad except for like
alternative hip-hop or some of the
righteous stuff and maybe most of it is
just is bad." Right? And so that became
an interesting fissure within the
conversation about hip-hop and hip-hop.
I mean going on through the 2000s,
2010s, there is a sense in which hip-hop
kind of got bracketed, right? Where like
rappers could say stuff on record that
no one else could say. And even at a
time when criticism became much more
intensely moralistic, there was a kind
of hip-hop exception. Well, this brings
me to the to what I would say is the is
another shift in the way that you're
thinking about this, which is this which
is the arrival of this
anti-roist
stance within the world of criticism and
maybe even music listening and fandom.
And it's called
>> it's it's a word that's even sillier
than rockism.
>> The word the word for obvious reasons is
not rapism. It's optimism.
>> Yes. optimism. Optimism to name the
sensibility that might come next.
>> And what I mean, what does it set out to
do? Because it doesn't stay in its box.
>> No, I mean, the idea is instead of just
celebrating Bruce Springsteen and stuff
that seems a little bit like Bruce
Springsteen, we're going to celebrate
pop music,
>> which on the one hand, there was and is
lots of great pop music. And at the time
this term was being used, there was a
lot of sort of self-consciously pop
music, right? There were acts like
Robin,
>> right, who were like kind of underground
but using the music and the sounds of
'8s pop music and proudly identifying as
pop. And it makes sense that there's a
critical movement that says like, "No,
we're going to be about we're going to
center the fact that we're celebrating
pop music." Now come the mid200s or the
you know early 2010s
>> Mhm.
>> like how are you experiencing this like
as a as a critic?
>> Well, so critically like the stuff that
was exciting was was changing. It's
becoming clear that if you want to talk
about music, it can't just be rock
music, right? It's becoming clear that
like we're we're going to need to talk
about hip-hop and R&B. So just like as
an aesthetic, the rock thing is starting
to fade a little bit, right? So critics
that want to talk about the interesting
music need a different vocabulary.
Anyways, it's a little bit paradoxical,
right? Because on one hand, if you're
saying like, "Yes, we're going to
embrace pop music because we're pop
music critics." Like, yeah, that makes a
lot of sense.
>> But optimism, right? Most of that word
is optimism, right? Like it has
>> it's inherently at odds with the
critical exercise.
>> Yeah. Does this mean we got to celebrate
all the pop songs? And I always thought
it was kind of ironic because if you
ever talk to an actual pop music fan,
>> that's like some of the most vicious
tribes you could possibly encounter.
Like they hate the people they hate and
even the songs they hate with a passion
of a thousand sons, right?
>> And so like one thing that a real pop
fan is not is like mildly positive about
pop music.
>> They're like this thing is great. This
thing is terrible. But I think that
underneath there was a really
interesting question which I think is a
question that anyone who's a music
critic confronts which is who are you
like who the [__] are you like to be to
be saying anything about XYZ artist?
>> Yeah. To be telling me that this is good
or this is bad to me that's the fun of
the job. But yes there is something that
question of who are you? And I think it
can be a political question, right? If
you're a non-black critic and you're
talking about music that is
disproportionately beloved by black
people, right? They're like, "Well, this
isn't for you. Who are you to say this?"
If you're a man writing about music made
by a woman, like, "Who are you to say
this is bad?" And so, I think that that
question is always bubbling and lurking
under the surface, especially with the
rockism popism debate. I think what
you're identifying with this question of
should people who aren't the
the demographic of the work they're or
artist they're writing about be allowed
to do it? Like how much should they know
or or be be aligned with?
>> They're always allowed to praise it. The
question is whether allowed
>> after that like how much criticism are
you what percentage criticism are you
allowed to expend on this work? Right?
But I think that that observation is
really critical to this shift. Right.
>> Yeah. I would cite the arrival of
Kendrick Lamar's to Pimp a Butterfly as
being
>> like an interesting turning point in
this
discourse around
identity and the identity politics that
sort of is per what had always sort of
been percolating through an aspect of
music criticism but now is explicitly
made textual. Yeah.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> There's a piece that Jay Casp wrote in
the New York Times magazine not long
after it had come out. Um where he is
just sort of he doesn't love the album,
right? And part of his frustration is,
you know, just as music, he wishes that
Kendrick were more of a storyteller here
rather than this messianic figure that
he sort of positions himself as being,
which is a classic complaint
>> um among certain hip-hop people about
the messianification
of certain hip-hop acts, right, who go
from, you know, the street to
saintthood, like of their own making
essentially. Here's Jay. Many of the
first critical responses to Pipa
Butterfly pleaded for more time to
figure out what exactly Lamar was doing.
In Slate, Carl Wilson, Great Critic,
that's me saying that wrote, "It's too
soon to say whether to pimp a butterfly
is a more satisfying album than Good Kid
Mad City, the previous album." In the
fader, Ruia Kamir wrote, "God knows how
long it'll be before any of us fully
grasp the stacked meanings, extended
metaphors, and shrouded complexities of
Kendrick Lamar's to a butterfly."
Definitely weeks, probably months. There
seemed to be a reluctance, Jay writes,
especially among white critics, to
straightforwardly criticize the album.
Quote, "How should white listeners
approach the overwhelming blackness of
Kendrick Lamar's brilliant new album?"
unquote, read the differential subhead
to Wilson Review. This caution is a
testament to Lamar's talent, but also
the power that comes with his Messiah
status. Critics seem afraid to say much
about this album because they want to
believe in him, too, even when what's in
front of them doesn't exactly deliver on
those expectations. Basically, here's
where Jay is
>> leaves the text of of Timber Butterfly
just to think about like the lonely
island he
sent as he might find himself on as a
Korean-American man writing about this
black ass album
>> and like insisting that he that people
just be honest about how it makes them
feel, right?
>> Whether like regardless of, you know,
how connected they are to to the themes
of its blackness. I mean, Jay is a guy
who's not afraid to stir the pot. And it
was really courageous of him to write
what he did about that album at that
moment. And the funny thing is that even
at the height of excitement about that
album, most of us, if we had talked to a
random group of our friends who love
hiphop, we probably would have heard a
diversity of opinions, right? If we were
talking to our friend group,
>> I I definitely was among a diversity of
opinions when that album dropped. And
just like normal people are pretty free
in being like I'm not trying to listen
to all that pimp or butterflies like you
know normal people. And so I think you
do have a bit of a problem when critics
start sounding less interesting
>> than everyday people.
>> Right. I'm not so much concerned with
what the opinion is, but I do think the
critic's job is to be interesting. And
so when there are those moments when it
feels like people are having more
interesting discussions in real life or
more pointed discussions or sharper
discussions in real life than on the
page that those are moments when I think
that like there is some energy that
professional music criticism is kind of
missing out on. And this goes back to
this argument about rockism, right?
Because rockism the term sort of sounds
like racism, right? It sounds like an
ism that you definitely don't want to be
associated with. Then part of the
discussion was that like, oh, maybe
critics are spending too much time
praising white guys in rock bands and
maybe as a result they're not spending
enough time thinking deeply about slow
jams or about some other form of music
that's maybe not dominated by white
guys. I would want to say though that
part of why rockism was valuable to
music critics was that it gave you a
frame. It gave you a narrative. I would
even defend the idea of prejudice,
right? The idea of prejudice is that I
have a value system. I have an idea
about what's good before I come to you
and before I assess what it is that
you're doing. I have a preconception.
The student in me wants to agree with
what you're saying about it being a
useful framework. But then just thinking
about like what it means to practice,
what it would have meant to do this work
>> in, you know, from like 1977
>> to
>> I I don't know. I mean, the the mid 90s
when hiphop was not only innocent, but
it was beginning to eclipse like, you
know, Rolling Stones beloved rock and
roll. And the argument against
rap album after rap album after rap
album was not so much about
rap as an art form, but about the ethics
of the sample, right? and the ways in
which all of this white music that had
wound up as, you know, tiling and grist
and, you know, gilding for these great
rap records came from this from this
rock music that is being befouled and
and bismerched by by a class of of of of
young black men.
>> I don't think I agree with that.
>> You don't think that that happened? Do
you don't think that was a response to
like like a like a class of rappers?
>> I think criticism of hip-hop sampling
practices was as likely if not more
likely to posit black pioneer musicians
as the people that were being befouled.
I mean, it depends who we're talking
about, right? But when critics are are
when when critics are criticizing Shawn
Combmes for taking every breath you take
and turning it into I'll be missing you
and they're like this is just karaoke
bad sample.
[Music]
>> Yeah. They're not saying like oh you're
befouling the legacy of Sting. They're
saying like oh this isn't creative
enough. And often the move that's made
in hip-hop criticism in general is this
is somehow led astray from the spirit of
good hip-hop which existed 5 or 10 years
ago. But then I mean all I can conclude
from what you're saying though is that
there
there has been a cost to this
encroaching niceness.
>> And one of the costs is that the
discourse gets fled. I mean, I'm not
saying anything terribly profound here,
but I mean, you've put your finger on
you've put your finger on this shift,
and I mean, I read your piece with a
great sense of lament, right?
>> Because I think that, you know, there
are a number of other things that have
happened to bring us to this moment.
Like I think that these so-called fan
armies have made it almost a terroristic
experience to be honest about how you
feel about some of these albums.
>> Yeah, I wouldn't I wouldn't I wouldn't
want to compare this job to actually
dangerous jobs and I wouldn't want to
try to solicit too much sympathy for
people who write about music, but yeah,
I think I think the online culture which
has blurred the distinction between
talking about someone and talking to
someone, right? In the social media era,
it's the same thing.
>> And so criticizing someone feels like
starting a feud sometimes. And so, yes,
fan bases and just people have raised
the cost sometimes of saying negative
things because of the kind of feedback
you get.
>> So, you think there's a difference now
because of the immediacy of the
platforms delivering a readership
straight to your end.
>> Yeah. And also, the jobs get less
secure, right? Maybe it's easier to
laugh off that kind of reaction if you
have a staff job. If you're a freelancer
>> and you're worried that this kind of
backlash not only like blows up your
mentions but like makes it harder for
you to get another assignment, you know,
that can seem different. Again, I don't
think it's like a life and death thing,
but I think it is something that maybe
is in the back or even in the front of
people's minds when they're deciding
what assignment to accept. And I think
that's another difference. If you're if
you're a staff critic, maybe you have to
review everything that comes across your
desk. Mhm.
>> If you're a freelancer, you're picking
and choosing and and the publication is
picking and choosing, too. And they're
probably not going to assign the BTS
review to the person who hates K-pop.
So, that there's a built-in bias, I
think, just from how the system works.
So, I think this is this is maybe
inherent in the industry. And I think
maybe part of what happened
>> inherent or is it like a a development
that has like swept up the industry?
>> Well, both. I think for me personally,
as I got older, I got less excited about
writing reviews saying that people were
terrible.
>> Okay, here we go.
>> Like I got nicer.
>> Okay.
>> And I think that there is a sense that
as people age, as genres age, sometimes
as institutions age, there can be that
sort of pressure to be a little more
quote unquote mature. I want to sort of
sit with this idea of
knowing when to fold them, so to speak.
>> What do you mean by that?
>> Well, I mean, you introduced the idea
that
you might have gotten to a point where
or you know you but also one reaches a
point where like the culture changes,
the music changes, you change. And so in
that divergence that time creates, you
change your relationship to how you want
to like write about music.
>> Yeah.
>> And express your feelings about about
about the art form.
>> I think I got more curious. I think that
was the biggest change.
>> How would you explain the difference?
>> When I heard something when I hear
something now that I don't like,
>> I'm kind of like, huh,
>> why don't I like that?
>> Why don't I like that? Who does like
that?
>> Why do they like it? Mhm.
>> Like would I eventually start liking it
if I listen to it a lot? Now there are
still things that I hear and I'm like uh
really people like that really and
>> is there an example of something like
that?
>> In the piece I mentioned the most recent
Lady Gaga album.
>> Sure.
>> Where like which has gotten you know
gotten good reviews and I just like
every time I listen to it I'm like ah
this sounds like a chore. This feels
like a slug.
>> That's not what you said. What you said
was
>> I will I will quote you. Do you remember
exactly what you said?
>> You tell me what I said.
>> Um what you said was I feel less
inspired to rail against say the most
recent Lady Gaga album cuz I'm putting
that cousin there. It strikes me as
awkward and effortful like someone
trying to start a dance party in an
empty nightclub.
>> Yeah. But why commit that kind of
judgment to print when instead I could
wait to see whether it will grow on me
as awkward seeming albums sometimes do?
That to me
>> is a critical escape vow.
>> I'll go back to it. I will return to
this album and consider maybe writing
about it in 10 years. Maybe Mayhem will
be like like Banger City
>> in 2033. I mean, obviously when I wrote
that, I was kind of making a joke
because I was saying I would never
commit this jud judgment to print while
committing to print.
>> Sure. Sure. Sure. Um, but there's also I
do think that when I was at the times
and I was doing daily criticism, one
thing I thought about a lot is
>> I want to write things that I feel like
I'm going to agree with in 10 years or
15 years because I know and I know from
experience that like people might bring
them up and I know that for the artist,
you know, that might follow them around
like, you know, there to the extent that
I felt a sense of responsibility, that's
the sense I felt. Not that anyone else
would have to agree with me in 10 years.
Like not that.
>> Could you live with yourself?
>> Yeah. Like I think it would be a little
annoying to read a critic who's like all
you know a year later was like never
mind and like and partly because there
is this impulse to go with the flow
right when we read when that's why I
love reading reviews that were published
in the 80s or the 90s or the 70s because
when you go back and everyone's saying
the politically correct thing and Prince
is the most amazing you know compare
that to you read Nelson George writing
in the 80s about how Prince is maybe a
sellout and you're like oh Yes,
>> that's that's a judgment that would have
been like kind of like sanded away by
time. And I think you understand Prince
better and you understand Prince's place
in the culture better if you read a
piece like that precisely because that's
the thing that no one would say today.
>> Mhm. Mhm. Well, not no one.
>> Not no one. I mean, one of the most
incendiary pieces of criticism that
like that somebody had the gall to to
both write and then have published was
was about, you know, what some people
would describe as our Lord and Savior,
Beyonce.
>> Beyonce,
>> how do we fix this? Cuz this is a very
big problem. And this piece happens in
the wake of her Renaissance film coming
out, a film she directed,
>> and it's by Angelica Jade Bastion, runs
in New York magazine, and it's
essentially review of the movie.
>> Do you remember this piece?
>> Yeah, of course.
>> Um,
>> people didn't like it.
>> There was a there were a class of people
who were upset by it, not
>> because of the quality of the criticism
per se. It was more that Angelica Jade
Bastion was practicing criticism at all
on a person who,
>> you know, depending on where you sit,
doesn't receive like enough.
>> I'm going to read to you toward the end
of this Angelica Jade Bastion review of
Beyonce's Renaissance movie
>> goes like this. When Beyonce uses their
aesthetic, we're talking about the Black
Panthers, black feminist, black power
movement. When Beyonce uses their
aesthetic along with the words of
Malcolm X, it behooves audiences and
critics alike to to hold her to a
greater standard. Her apoliticism should
not slide by. Her apoliticism should not
slide by. It should be noted that
Renaissance is playing in Israel, which
has led to Break My Soul becoming an
anthem of sorts for Israelis waving
their flag in screenings. Beyonce has
yet to make a statement about Palestine,
but this silence is itself a statement.
Perhaps she isn't apolitical so much as
an emblem of black capitalism and a
wealth that seeks to maintain its
stature. Renaissance, a film,
demonstrates that black joy isn't
inherently radical. In fact, without a
sense of materiality, black joy becomes
directionless and easy to co-opt by the
varied forces of power that are fueled
by antilackness.
Beyonce is an icon who has carefully
maintained a sense of accessibility to
anyone, anywhere, for any reason. Black
musical traditions may have their may
have the potential for radicalism, but
Beyonce's neutrality demonstrates they
aren't inherently that way. More than
anything, Renaissance is a testament
that Beyonce is a brand that stands for
absolutely nothing beyond its own
greatness.
>> But this to me is the continuation of
this tradition that we're kind of
dealing with here. And it's a person who
in the reading seems unafraid to say the
the unsayable
>> um about a person who has come to mean
to many people who's come to seem and
represent and embody
very much uh
a meaningful blackness. Yeah.
>> And it's an ethical argument and it's a
political argument and therefore
>> it's exciting to read that to listen to
that. And again, I think a lot of times
in music criticism sometimes the most
exciting pieces are the pieces that take
us away from the practice of making
music. Right. It's hard
>> I was going to say like she's left the
realm of the art itself. It's hard to
generate that kind of excitement when
you're talking about, you know, well,
this drum hit was sampled from this and
the way they cut out some of the mids
and added some of the bass. Like that
kind of technical musicological writing
tends not to generate that kind of
excitement. And so again, this goes this
goes back to the idea of rockism, right?
The idea of if you have some sort of
frame and maybe it's an ethical frame
and maybe it's a frame that tells a
story of good and bad, right? You can
write a piece about music that feels
like it's part of this good versus bad
struggle.
>> Right. Right.
>> And you can do that in a in a in a
context of what we would call rockism.
We you can do that in the context of
fighting back against rockism. You can
do that in the context of making an
argument about the co-option of black
culture. But a lot of times the exciting
musical stories kind of do that. And I
think one thing that happened in the
aftermath of the Rockism debate was
critics had a hard time finding a new
story. One answer was this political
answer, right? Then one thing music can
do is it can fight against injustice and
oppression and you can write a review
using that as a frame casting music or
the musician as a hero or a villain in
that story
>> for simply being the person they are not
necessarily not not inherently for the
music they make. Right.
>> Well, yeah. Or you could talk about how
the music fits into that. And again, I
have some sympathy for that because part
of the reason we love music is that it
always ends up feeling to us like it's
something more than just music, right?
Part of the reason Yeah. Sure.
>> Part of the reason I loved people
shouting and fast guitars back in the
day was cuz it summoned up this whole
world, this whole like ethical world of
like, well, here's how we're going to
run our concerts and here's what we
believe about the meat industry or
whatever, right? And so the idea that
music has that power, like a piece like
that is a testament to that kind of
power. That when we listen to music,
often we're thinking about stuff that's
beyond the music. And when we're
fighting about music, often we're having
these broader fights. And that we don't
really want a world where people are
fighting about music. They're literally
fighting about guitar tones and time
signatures.
>> Right. I think inherently I have been
doing this long enough to know where the
lines are. Um, and I also think it
matters to me. I don't know what your
social media relationship is, but I
don't really have one.
>> And I don't know if that makes it easier
for me to sort of practice whatever kind
of criticism I'm doing and not having to
worry about how it's going to make me
feel. But I also am never hamm attacking
people, right,
>> for the people they are. And I think I
think there's a way to do that. You
know, it's funny that that the that this
that piece we were talking about with
Beyonce that Angelica Jade Bastion
wrote, it comes right up to the line of
a kind of ad hominemum attack, right?
>> Yeah. I mean, or not attack, but I mean,
it's a critique of of the of the almost
the soul of the person.
>> Yeah. And I'm not sure that ad homonym
is necessarily a bad thing in that
sense, right? ad homonym is is a
derogatory way to characterize an
argument if people are having like a
philosophical debate. But part of what a
pop star is selling is their persona, is
their whole thing. So it's not
necessarily out of bounds to have a
personal response to a pop star to have
a and in fact if you talk to someone
who's not a music critic, as most people
are not,
>> right, they have no problem.
>> Yes.
>> Going to town on the personhood of the
person. For me, there's part of me,
probably for part of you, that says,
"Well, let me just make sure I'm
actually saying what I actually feel.
Let me make sure that what I'm saying is
as close as possible to what I would say
to my friend, right? Let me let me I'm"
Anytime I find myself not saying
something that I would say to my
friends, that makes me a little bit
suspicious of myself.
>> Yeah. I mean, I I really like that
assessment because it does then bring us
from the page into the real world.
>> And I've been thinking a lot about since
I read your piece
what the value of the work is. I
frequently think about this.
>> Um I know.
>> You mean like what's the point? I am
thinking about that Monday after Taylor
Swift weekend happens and the weekend
after the life of a showgirl drops and I
go to my coffee shop and I get in there
and all the people who do the coffee
want to talk about to me
>> is this album. In this case it was
Gianna and Joy. I'm standing there
talking to them and Gianna is like tell
me about the Taylor Robin. What' you
think about it?
>> And I'm like,
it's okay.
>> You're not with where our friend John
Carmonica is on this one.
>> No, I'm not. And I But it doesn't
matter. The thing that was fun about
that moment was they really wanted to
know what I thought
>> and how I felt and like did I, you know,
did I like it or did I not like it?
>> And that felt fun to me to be able to
sit there or stand there in this shop
with these three people, one of whom was
all in and was really thinking about the
meaning. She'd thought about the meaning
of everything already. She knew she knew
what every song meant, who it was
probably about. Right.
>> But I don't know. I'm like, "Oh, this is
the point." Sure.
>> Right. And I probably would not have
been had the same facility if I hadn't
like worked through the feelings through
a piece of criticism before I got to
those guys.
>> Well, yeah. To me, the fun part is the
figuring out.
>> Part of why
>> You mean the sitting down and and
actually thinking it through?
>> Yeah. But also the uncertainty or
>> walking around and thinking
>> also the uncertainty. I think part of
the reason why it was kind of easy for
me to step back from doing kind of like
day daily music criticism when I did
part of the reason was like I got my
dream job but part of it right like you
know I got to like go to New Yorker and
write about whatever it was it's great
still great um but part of it was I was
getting to a point where I was starting
to feel like I knew what I thought about
pop music
>> and that's a little less interesting to
me right so I like the idea of taking a
step back thinking about some other
stuff and coming back to it when I was
once again feeling a little bit confused
or like cuz my favorite writing to read
is when you feel like someone's figuring
something out or trying to figure
something out.
>> And so anytime I feel like oh I know
what I think about this that's something
I don't really want to write about. I
also think you know if we go back to
talking when we talked about rockism and
the idea that critics who had that
background were missing out on
something. One thing I did in the wake
of writing about rockism was I wrote a
book about popular music,
>> a very good book called
>> Major Labels,
>> Major Labels, and it just goes through
every
>> It goes through seven genres,
>> many genres.
>> But part of what that helped me think
about was that
>> any community of listeners has their own
prejudices, their own ideas about what
matters and what doesn't, and the right
way to do things and the wrong way to do
things. And that even as people that's
how we make sense of the world is by
dismissing some of the world. We can't
pay attention to everything. We can't
say that like oh all music traditions
are equally valuable to us, right?
There's always something offscreen.
There's always something we're not
giving due to. And so in that sense like
it's not just a it's not a defense of
prejudice exactly, but it's saying that
prejudice is we don't have any
alternative to that, right? We're always
missing out on something. We're always
not understanding something because
we're using some sort of framework to
make sense of whatever it is that we're
hearing. And so the question isn't like,
oh, are we inclusive or not? The
question is like, well, what do we want
to ignore? What do we want to devalue?
So, but where does that where is that
leaving you now as as a thinker and as a
critic, right? Like if optimism is good
for anything for me, it is almost
certainly like the celebration of of
possibility,
>> not the art in and of itself being
celebratory because it exists.
>> But the other thing is also like I was
at the NBA Young Boy concert a few weeks
ago in New York, New Jersey, and like
this is the most hip-hop environment you
can imagine, right? Like in a sense this
is a really strict, narrow, everyone
there knows all the words. It saw, you
know, thugged out people with the the
lime green bandanas. It was a really, in
that sense, culturally, it felt like a
really pure audience, like everyone
liked this one thing.
>> And there's enormous power to that, too.
>> Oh, sure. I
feel like
there is a kind of religious experience
to that. And you're in your house of
worship and this is denominational.
>> Yeah. I I mean I don't even know where
we are right now in terms of like where
I'm where I'm trying to even get but I'm
just sitting with the idea that you know
we began this conversation thinking
about the ways in which music criticism
has gone from
you know something a lot more direct and
blunt and and exploratorily
uh willing to risk negative creativity
to to like get it assessing the quality
of something
>> to like thinking about
>> like a more existential question about
what it even means to practice
>> the form in some way.
>> And we've been I think circling a little
bit around this idea of preconceptions
>> and the idea that you bring
preconceptions with you to music. And if
you have no preconception, your music
criticism is probably not going to be
interesting because it's probably not
going to be coherent,
>> right? But if your if your
preconceptions are too strong,
>> you're going to maybe miss out on
hearing something interesting that would
challenge those precept.
>> But how did you get to a point where you
felt like you had figured it out? And
then when did you feel like you had the
capacity to forget what you'd figured
out?
>> Oh, I don't know. Cuz music is always
changing and there's always something
there. I'm going to hear a new song
tomorrow that helps me like be like,
"Oh, that helps me like think about
country music slightly differently."
Like there's always some new music. And
so yes, I think it was it was an
illusion the sense that I had it all
figured out. But maybe what it meant
that was that for that I was getting
closer to a point where I wasn't
listening as carefully as I needed to
be.
>> Is it more that you were burnt out?
>> I mean maybe I mean burnt out makes it
sound like I had a real job that was
actually hard. Right. Which many people
do.
>> Listen, you were several times a week
>> that you know required you to stay out
till 2:00 in the morning, 3:00 in the
morning.
>> Sometimes I did that even when not
required.
>> Right. Well, I mean, that's your
problem. But,
>> but yeah. Yeah, I use that. It's nice to
It's nice to take a breath. But yes, I I
never stopped listening to music as as
much as I do. And again, criticism if
you define it broadly as I do to include
what people are saying on TikTok. And
also like
>> what I do if I'm writing a profile and I
mention something about the music in
there. Yeah, we're all practicing it all
the time. As long as we care about
music, we'll argue about it, right?
We'll we'll do the critical thing of
having strong and differing opinions.
It's just a question of where those
opinions appear might might change, but
I don't think we're running out of
opinions.
>> No, just arguing about how they should
be expressed is a different story.
>> Okay, Califa.
>> Mhm.
>> I think we did it.
>> Did we do it?
>> I think we we solved music criticism. We
told the story of how we got from at
least Robert Kriscowl to and Lester
Bangs to right now and uh you made me
really excited to like see what the next
10 years of music music criticism looks
like. Califa,
>> we did it.
>> We did it.
>> Thanks, man.
>> Thanks for appreciate it.
[Music]